MixedModels v3.0 Release Notes
========================

New formula features
---------------------

* Nested grouping factors can be written using the `/` notation, as in
  `@formula(strength ~ 1 + (1|batch/cask))` as a model for the `pastes` dataset.
* The `zerocorr` function converts a vector-valued random effects term from
  correlated random effects to uncorrelated. (See the `constructors` section of the docs.)
* The `fulldummy` function can be applied to a factor to obtain a redundant encoding
  of a categorical factor as a complete set of indicators plus an intercept.  This is only
  practical on the left-hand side of a random-effects term.  (See the `constructors` section
  of the docs.)
* `Grouping()` can be used as a contrast for a categorical array in the `contrasts` dictionary.
  Doing so bypasses creation of contrast matrix, which, when the number of levels is large,
  may cause memory overflow.  As the name implies, this is used for grouping factors. [#339]

Rank deficiency
--------------------

* Checks for rank deficiency in the model matrix for the fixed-effects
  parameters have been improved.
* The distinction between `coef`, which always returns a full set of coefficients
  in the original order, and `fixef`, which returns possibly permuted and
  non-redundant coefficients, has been made consistent across models.

Parametric bootstrap
--------------------

* The `parametricbootstrap` function and the struct it produces have been
  extensively reworked for speed and convenience.
  See the `bootstrap` section of the docs.

Principal components
--------------------

* The PCA property for `MixedModel` types provides principal components from
  the correlation of the random-effects distribution (as opposed to the covariance)
* Factor loadings are included in the `print` method for the `PCA` struct.

`ReMat` and `FeMat` types
----------------------------------

* An `AbstractReMat` type has now been introduced to support [#380] work on constrained
  random-effects structures and random-effects structures appropriate for applications 
  in GLM-based decovolution as used in fMRI and EEG (see e.g. [unfold.jl](https://github.com/unfoldtoolbox/unfold.jl).) 
* Similarly, a constructor for `FeMat{::SparseMatrixCSC,S}` has been introduced [#309].
  Currently, this constructor assumes a full-rank matrix, but the work on rank 
  deficiency may be extended to this constructor as well.
* Analogous to `AbstractReMat`, an `AbstractReTerm <: AbstractTerm` type  has been introduced [#395]. 
  Terms created with `zerocorr` are of type `ZeroCorr <: AbstractReTerm`.

Availability of test data sets
------------------------------

* Several data sets from the literature were previously saved in `.rda` format
  in the `test` directory and read using the `RData` package. These are now available
  in an `Artifact` in the [`Arrow`](https://github.com/JuliaData/Arrow.jl.git) format [#382].
* Call `MixedModel.datasets()` to get a listing of the names of available datasets
* To load, e.g. the `dyestuff` data, use `MixedModels.dataset(:dyestuff)`
* Data sets are loaded using `Arrow.Table` which returns a column table.  Wrap the
  call in `DataFrame` if you prefer a `DataFrame`.
* Data sets are cached and multiple calls to `MixedModels.dataset()` for the same
  data set have very low overhead after the first call.

Replacement capabilities
------------------------

* `describeblocks` has been dropped in favor of the `BlockDescription` type
* The `named` argument to `ranef` has been dropped in favor of `raneftables`

Package dependencies
--------------------

* Several package dependencies have been dropped, including `BlockDiagonals`, `NamedArrays` [#390],
  `Printf` and `Showoff`
* Dependencies on `Arrow` [#382], `DataAPI` [#384], and `PooledArrays` have been added.

<!--- generated by NEWS-update.jl: -->
[#309]: https://github.com/JuliaStats/MixedModels.jl/issues/309
[#339]: https://github.com/JuliaStats/MixedModels.jl/issues/339
[#380]: https://github.com/JuliaStats/MixedModels.jl/issues/380
[#382]: https://github.com/JuliaStats/MixedModels.jl/issues/382
[#384]: https://github.com/JuliaStats/MixedModels.jl/issues/384
[#390]: https://github.com/JuliaStats/MixedModels.jl/issues/390
[#395]: https://github.com/JuliaStats/MixedModels.jl/issues/390
